## Introduction to the Command Line  

### What is the command line?  
The CLI is a way of interacting with your computer using text based commands.

### General format for commands

`<command> -<options> <arguments>`
* `<command>` is the action we want the computer to take
* `<options>` (or "flags") modify the behavior of the command
* `<arguments>` are the things we want the command to act on

### File paths

A **relative file path** specifies the path to a file, taking into account the current working directory. 

An **absolute file path** specifies the complete path to a file, ignoring the current working directory. 

### Basic commands

##### `pwd` 
* prints working directory 

##### `ls`
* lists files and subdirectories in working directory
* `ls -a` lists **a**ll files, including hidden files
* `ls -l` lists the files in a **l**ong format with extra information (permissions, size, last modified date, etc.)
* `ls *` also lists the contents of subdirectories (one level deep) in the working directory
* `ls <path>` lists files in a specific directory (without changing the working directory)

##### `clear`
* clears all output from the terminal console.

##### `cd`
* `cd <path>` **c**hanges **d**irectory to the path specified, which can be a relative path or an absolute path
* `cd ..` moves "up" one directory (to the parent directory)
* `cd` moves to "home" directory

##### `mkdir`
* `mkdir <dirname>` **m**a**k**es a new **dir**ectory called `<dirname>`

##### `touch`
* `touch <filename>` creates an empty file called `<filename>`
* This is useful for creating empty files to be edited at a later time.

##### `rm -i`
* `rm <filename>` **r**e**m**oves (deletes) a file permanently
* `rm -i <filename>` removes files in **i**nteractive mode, in which you are prompted to confirm that you really want to delete the file. It's best to always use `rm -i`.
* `rm -ir <dirname>` removes a directory and **r**ecursively deletes all of its contents
* `rmdir` removes directory

##### `mv`
* `mv <filename> <new path>` **m**o**v**es a file from its current location to `<new path>`
* `mv <filename> <new filename>` renames a file without changing its location

##### `cp`
* `cp <filename> <new path>` **c**o**p**ies a file from its current location to `<new path>`, leaving the original file unchanged
* `cp <filename> <new filename>` copies a file without changing its location
* You can also copy directories


### Intermediate commands

##### `head`
* `head <filename>` prints the **head** (the first 10 lines) of the file
* `head -n20 <filename>` prints the first 20 lines of the file

##### `tail`
* `tail <filename>` prints the **tail** (the last 10 lines) of the file

##### `cat`
* `cat <filename>` prints the entire file

##### `less`
* `less <filename>` allows you to page or scroll through the file
* Hit the spacebar to go down a page, use the arrow keys to scroll up and down, and hit `q` to exit.

##### `wc`
* `wc <filename>` returns the **c**ount of lines, **w**ords, and characters in a file
* `wc -l <filename>` only counts lines, `wc -w <filename>` only counts words, and `wc -c <filename>` only counts characters
* A "word" is defined as any set of characters delimited by a space.

##### `find`
* `find <path> -name <name>` will recursively search the specified path (and its subdirectories) and **find** files and directories with a given `<name>`
    * Use `.` for the `<path>` to refer to the working directory.
* For the `<name>`, you can search for an exact match, or use wildcard characters to search for a partial match:
    * `*` specifies any number of any characters, such as `find . -name *.py` or `find . -name *data*.*`
    * `?` specifies one character, such as `find . -name ??_*.*`

##### `grep`
* `grep <pattern> <filename>` searches a file for a **r**egular **e**xpression **p**attern and prints the matching lines
    * The pattern should be in quotation marks to allow for multiple words.
    * The pattern is case-sensitive by default, but you can use the `-i` option to **i**gnore case.
* `grep -r <pattern> <path>` does a **r**ecursive search of the path (checks subdirectories) for matches within files
    * Use `.` for the `<path>` to refer to the working directory.
* `grep <pattern>` does a **g**lobal search (of your entire computer) for matches
    * Hit `Ctrl + c` if you want to cancel the search.

##### `|`
* `<command 1> | <command 2>` pipes the results from `<command 1>` into `<command 2>`, and then the results of `<command 2>` are printed to the console

##### `>`
* `<command> > <filename>` takes the output of `<command>` and saves it in `<filename>`
* This will overwrite the file if it already exists.

##### `>>`
* `<command> >> <filename>` takes the output of `<command>` and appends it to `<filename>`
* This will create the file if it does not yet exist.


### Advanced commands

##### `cut`
* `cut -f1,2 <filename>` **cut**s a tab-delimited file into columns and returns the first two **f**ields
* `cut -f1,2 -d, <filename>` indicates that the file is **d**elimited by commas

##### `sort`
* `sort <filename>` **sort**s a file by the first field

##### `uniq`
* `uniq <filename>` discards all but one of the successive identical lines (thus it only keeps **uniq**ue lines)
* `uniq -c <filename>` also records the **c**ount of the number of occurrences
* Because lines must be successive to be counted as identical, you will usually use `sort` before `uniq`.